## 15.1 - Data Visualization in JavaScript with plotly.js

### Goals

* We'll continue reinforcing JavaScript fundamentals
* We'll learn some of the newer features included in a recent version of JavaScript, which we refer to as ES6.
* We'll use plotly.js (uses d3.js behind the scenes) to develop basic data visualizations: scatter, bar, pie, line, and box plots.
* We'll customize the appearance of these charts with Plotly's `layout` object. We'll also annotate charts with labels, text, and hover info.

### Notes

* As you have time, work through the class exercises as much as possible again on your own. Don't just re-read solution. Code the solution from scratch without looking at it. Try to recall the methods / attributes to use without looking at documentation first.

### Exercises

One small note - the keys of objects in JS do not require quotation marks around them, like in Python. Note that you can still add them (and you need to if your key contains a space, e.g. `{ 'this is a test': 4 }`), and JSON still requires quotation marks around object keys. See [this reference](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/12991969/js-object-keys-with-or-without-quotes) for more.

#### 1 - ES6

ES6 stands for "ECMAScript 6". ECMAScript = JavaScript. ES6 was a major addition to JavaScript: it's a change more important than Python 3 was to Python 2. We'll learn about some of the features ES6 introduced, which have [large support in modern browsers](http://kangax.github.io/compat-table/es6/) today.

With `var`, variables are declared before any other code is run within its enclosing scope. So the following code:

    console.log(x);
    var x = 'hello';

will declare the variable `x` _before_ `console.log(x)` runs, but only set the value to "hello" when we encounter the line `var x = 'hello'`. So JavaScript technically runs this:

    var x;
    console.log(x);
    x = 'hello';

So `console.log(x)` will print `undefined`. If this sounds confusing, it is!

ES6 introduced two new keywords: `let` and `const`. Declaring a variable with `let` or `const` will only declare and initialize the variable when that line of code is run. So

    console.log(y);
    let y = 'hello';

will throw a `ReferenceError`, because `y` isn't yet declared when we run `console.log(y)`.

*This behavior makes much more sense! `let` has improved the way we program because it helps reduce potential error like the use of `var` above.*

`const` is just like `let`, but variables initialized using `const` cannot be re-assigned a new value. This code:

    const y = 0;
    y = 1;

will throw a `TypeError`, telling you you cannot assign a new value to `y`.

You _can_ still manipulate objects or arrays (add new properties to objects, add new elements to arrays using `push()`) declared using `const`. You just can't re-assign the value completely.

This also helps us reduce errors when programming. You know that some variables should never be re-assigned a value. By declaring with `const`, you can make sure you throw an error if you ever try to write code that re-assigns the variable. This forbids you from accidentally overwriting this variable later (and introducing a bug). *Anything that helps us reduce bugs is a huge win*.

`foreach` makes it much, much easier to iterate over elements of an array. `foreach` is run on an array and takes one argument: the function to run for each element of the array:

    const arr = [1, 2, 3]
    function printNumber(number, index) {
        console.log(number, index);
    };
    arr.forEach(printNumber);

Here, `printNumber` is the callback function. `forEach` passes two arguments to the callback function: 1.) the element you're currently processing when you iterate over the array, and 2.) the current index of the element you're currently processing.

`map` operates much like `forEach`. You use `map` to iterate over the elements of an existing array, *creating a new array* in the process. Often, you have some array you're working with in a program, and you want to keep that data unchanged for future use. But you may need to process each of the elements in that array (say, multiply each number by 2), and keep a copy of that new array.

Template literals make it easier to form strings from variables, without having to concatenate each part of the string together. This code:

    const num = 1
    const name = "Dylan";
    const greeting = "Hello student #' + num + ', ' + name;

can be written:

    const num = 1
    const name = "Dylan";
    const greeting = `Hello student #${num}, ${name}`;

You just wrap the string in backticks, and include variables with the syntax `${yourVar}`.

Read more about [arrow functions](https://codeburst.io/javascript-arrow-functions-for-beginners-926947fc0cdc).

#### 2 - Plotly.js

* `Plotly.newPlot` takes three arguments: 1.) the ID of the div you want to add the plot to, 2.) the array of data you want to plot, and 3.) an object that describe the layout, title, and other metadata about the chart.
* The data includes arrays of `x` and `y` data, including the type of the chart (e.g. `bar`).
* `var data = [trace1]` encloses our one and only trace inside of an array. If we wanted to include many "traces" on our plot, we'd add them both to the array.

#### 4 - Multiple Traces

* We add multiple trace objects to our data array to plot multiple traces.
* We can leave out the layout parameter. This will use the default layout / styles provided by Plotly.

#### 6 - Sorting and Slicing

* The `sort` method of an array takes a single argument: a function comparing two adjacent elements of an array and returning them in sorted order.
* If the comparison function returns a positive number, it will put the adjacent elements in the reverse order in the final array (e.g. given [a, b], the comparison function would return [b, a] in the final array if the comparison function returns a positive number)
* If the comparison function returns a negative number, it will put the adjacent elements in the same order in the final array (given [a, b], the order is unchanged in the final array).
* `sort` modifies the array we run the method on in-place.
* `slice` enables us to copy a subset of an array. `slice` takes two arguments: 1.) the index where we should start copying, and 2.) the number of elements to copy.
* e.g. `[1, 2, 3].slice(0, 2)` returns `[1, 2]`

#### 8 - Scatter Plots

* This exercise requires you to find out how to create scatter plots from the Plotly docs

#### 9 - Box Plots (Box and Whisker plots)

* Each box visualizes a distribution.
* Great for comparing distributions to one another in the same plot.
* Histograms are another way to visualize the distribution, but are more difficult to compare to one another.
* [Plotly introduction to box plots](https://help.plot.ly/what-is-a-box-plot/)
* The line in the middle marks the median.
* The upper and lower parts of the box demarcate the first quartile and third quartile, i.e. the point at 25% and 75%
* Finally, the lines that look like a "T", below the box, mark the "largest" outlier value within 1.5 times the "interquartile range" (IQR) outside the points that mark Q1 and Q3. See the "Whiskers with all points visible" section of [this reference](https://help.plot.ly/what-is-a-box-plot/) for a good visualization of this concept.
