## 14.1 - Intro to Javascript

### Goals

* Wrap up Splinter (scraping) exercise from last class
* Learn the basics of Javascript
* Learn how to manipulate the DOM (Document Object Model - we'll get to this)

### Preliminary Notes

* We'll start class with the final student exercise from last class
* So that we're not constantly `git push`ing or uploading files to Slack, all the instructor demos are in the student repo. Please focus on the concepts during the demo, and review the code later.

### Exercises

#### 0 - JS and the DOM at a high-level

* JavaScript allows web developers to bake logic into their websites, thus making their webpages interactive.
* JavaScript also allows websites to send and recieve data from a server, respond to actions a user takes while on the page, and dynamically modify HTML elements.
* Web developers often use the term "DOM" when discussing how JavaScript interacts with the HTML of a webpage.
* DOM = Document Object Mode
* [MDN resource on the DOM](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model/Introduction)
* [Another resource on the DOM](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model/Introduction)
* When an HTML document is loaded by a web browser, the document is parsed, interpreted, and the DOM is constructed.
* Example: youtube.com updates the DOM with results as you search for new videos (no page navigation required)
* We'll get into why this all matters throughout the next week.

#### 1 - Introduction to JS, within a script tag and in its own JS file

* Javascript is the language of the web browser, so Javascript is not often run within a terminal. 
* Javascript can be stored in `<script>` tags, which can live in the `head` or the `body` of a page
* [Reference on the `<script>` tag](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script)
* Anything within the starting and closing `<script>` tags is Javascript.
* `console.log` is like `print`.
* Instead of printing text to the screen, it prints it to the Javascript console built into all major browsers
* Chrome Developer Tools -> Console
* Referencing external Javascript, using the `src` attribute of a `<script>` tag, is conventional. Just like CSS, this allows you to re-use Javascript easily across pages and it helps keep your code separate (better for human readability).

#### 2 - From Python to JS

* *The core principles you've used in Python - conditionals, for loops, etc. - are the same. Learning the basics of Javascript just means learning a new syntax.*
* WE'RE CODING THIS ONE TOGETHER
* Variables must be initialized using the syntax `var <variableName> = <value>`, e.g. `var myVar = 3`
* Javascript will automatically determine the type of the variable, just like in Python.
* Lines end with semi-colons! Technically not required, but a strict convention.
* Booleans are lower-cased. Python: True. Javascript: true.
* When we print Javascript variables, we don't have to case integers and other data types to strings explicitly, like we did in Python.
* [Equality in Javascript](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Equality_comparisons_and_sameness)
* and : &&
* or : ||

#### 4 - Prompts

* The `prompt(<text>)` method creates a dialog box which asks the user for an input. Whatever string is passed into the method will be the prompt message given to the user.
* No matter what the user inputs in response to the prompt, *the returned value will always be cast as a string*.
* The `prompt()` method returns the input value only if the user clicks "OK" on the pop-up. If the user clicks "cancel" the method returns null instead.
* The `alert` method displays a popup to the user with the text passed to it.

#### 6

* Conceptually, `for` loops work the same as in Python. But the syntax is quite different.
* Python -> lists. Javascript -> arrays
* `for (var i = start; i < end; increment i)`
* e.g. `for (var i = 0; i < 10; i++)`
* First, the variable i is declared and set to a starting point, followed by a semi-colon
* Next, i is told to keep looping while its value is less than 10, followed by a semi-colon.
* Lastly, the loop is telling i to increase by one each time through.

#### 8

* Javascript objects : Python dictionaries
* JSON = JavaScript Object Notation, so we've been dealing with Javascript objects for a while!
* You can look up values in an object by key, using "dot notation": `obj.key` returns the value at `key`
* You can extract elements from an array by index, just like in Python (`array[0]`)

#### 10

* The document.querySelector method is used to get a reference to the element with the ID of app in the HTML and stored in the variable `app`.
* `querySelector` grabs elements the same way as in CSS with its id or class attribute.
* The `innerHTML` attribute is used to set the inner HTML contents of the "app" element.
* Note that document.querySelector returns only the first element which matches the selector while document.querySelectorAll returns every element which matches the selector

#### 12

* We've discussed how JavaScript can help you write interactive code: code that responds to user interaction. We'll investigate how that works here.
* The DOM exposes "events", e.g. click, scroll, keydown
* The DOM also exposes a way to run code in reaction to these events.
* Events have 1.) a target (the part of the page that the event is raised on: a button, for instance) and 2.) a handler (a function we run which is executed in response to the event).
* We run the `addEventListener` method on our target element. `addEventListener` accepts as arguments 1.) the event type (a string) and 2.) the function we run in response to that event.
