## 14.2 - More JavaScript

### Goals

* Further your understanding of the DOM
* Use more JavaScript methods that operate on strings and arrays
* Construct tables using JS
* Learn about callback functions, how to use them

### Exercises

#### 0 - Introduce HW

* Today's class will introduce you to many of the methods required for HW
* Demo
* You need only complete 1 stage to get full credit for the HW
* The page can have whatever layout you want - have fun with it!

#### 1 - Callback Functions

* A callback is a function that's passed as an argument to another function.
* Functions are variables, just like strings and numbers. This means you can pass them to other functions as arguments, return them from functions, and use them like you would any other variable.
* In this context, functions are "first class" (on the same level as other variables). You may hear the term "first class functions".
* *When we pass a function as an argument to another function, we leave out the parentheses*. Otherwise, the function will get executed immediately.
* The callback function is run only when run within the parent function.
* We can pass anonymous functions as callback functions (anonymous functions are functions that are not named / defined elsewhere in the code - just like lambda functions in Python).
* Callback functions are used with `addEventListener`, like we saw last class.

#### 3 - Click Counter

* When we handle an event, we want to know a lot of details about that event. What element was clicked? What were the (x, y) coordinates clicked? etc.
* The callback function (we call this an "event handler") that we pass to the addEventListener method accepts an "event" argument that contains all of the information about the event.
* The `addEventListener` method passes this event argument to the event handler. The event handler does whatever it wants with this event.

#### 5 - Movie Patrons

* Many events have a default action associated with them. For form data, the browser would automatically try to submit the form to a server that accepts the data.
* If we don't specify where we're supposed to submit form data, the browser refreshes the page. This is probably not what you want!
* We use a method called `preventDefault` to prevent this from happening. [Here's one reference](https://www.w3schools.com/jsref/event_preventdefault.asp), and [another](https://javascript.info/default-browser-action).
* The `value` attribute of an input field retrieves the value the user entered.
* The `trim` method of a string removes any leading or trailing whitespace.

#### 7 - More JavaScript methods

* This is critical for HW - study this section well!
* [`insertRow`](https://www.w3schools.com/jsref/met_table_insertrow.asp) creates an empty `<tr>` element and adds it to the table body element on which it's called.
* [`insertCell`](https://www.w3schools.com/jsref/met_tablerow_insertcell.asp) creates an empty `<td>` element and adds it to the table row element on which it's called.
* Use `Object.keys(obj)` to return an Array of the keys of `obj`
* [More about `Object.keys(obj)` and why we call that instead of `obj.keys()`](https://javascript.info/keys-values-entries)
* Use `Object.values(obj)` to return an Array of the values of `obj`
* Use `Object.entries(obj)` to return an 2-dimensional Array of the keys and values of `obj`
* Use `arr.filter(filterFunc)` to return an Array of the elements in `arr` for which `filterFunc` returns true ([reference here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/filter))

#### 9 - Even more JavaScript methods

* The `indexOf` method returns the position of the first character of a given substring in the string on which you call the method.
* Running `"this is a test".indexOf("blah")` returns -1, since "blah" is not found within the string.
* `split` splits a string into elements of an array, split on the given delimiter. e.g. `"test".split('')` returns `['t', 'e', 's', 't']` and `"this is a test".split(" ")` returns `['this', 'is', 'a', 'test']`.
* `reverse` reverses the elements of an array
* `join` joins the elements of an array together, separated by the string passed to `join`. e.g. `['t', 'e', 's', 't'].join('')` returns "test", and `['t', 'e', 's', 't'].join(" * ")` returns "t * e * s * t"
* `splice` removes elements from an array, returning the elements removed. This modifies the original array (this is called a "destructive" method). `splice` takes two arguments: the index at which we start removing elements, and the number of elements to remove. `[1, 2, 3].splice(0, 2)` returns [1, 2].
* [`slice`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/slice) is like `splice`, but is non-destructive (does not modify the original array, just returns the desired elements).
