## 14.3 - D3,js

### Goals

* Today is all about D3. This is what we've been working towards with JavaScript: next week, you'll finally be able to create data visualizations using JavaScript.
* You'll learn some D3 methods to clean and summarize data.
* You'll manipulate the DOM using D3.
* We'll handle events (e.g. click) in our data visualizations.
* We'll make HTTP requests and display the resulting data.

### Notes

* It's worth taking a look at last section of Notes and [the final instructor demo](http://ucb.bootcampcontent.com/UCB-Coding-Bootcamp/10-30-2017-UCB-Class-Repository-DATA/tree/master/01-Lesson-Plans/14-Intro-To-JavaScript/2/Activities/Solved/09-Ins_JavaScript_Methods) from Monday's class. 
* Since we're still off schedule from President's Day, we'll be doing the last exercise on Saturday.
* I'll be posting the links to videos ASAP after each class in BCS. Previously I'd been posting these once / week but I know that the links to the recordings in #resources can be difficult to find with all the links we send out.
* Today we'll be learning the fundamentals of D3. We'll be spending next week creating data visualizations.

### Exercises

#### 1 - Introduction to D3 and `select`

* We'll start by using D3 to manipulate the DOM
* Load D3 by including this `<script>` tag in the `head`: `<script src="https://d3js.org/d3.v4.min.js"></script>`
* Similar to selecting DOM elements with `soup.find()` when web scraping with Beautiful Soup, we can use D3 to extract information from an HTML document, and can change its contents and styling.
* We can use [`d3.select(selector)`](https://github.com/d3/d3-selection/blob/master/README.md#select) to select the first element that matches the specified selector ([CSS selector](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Introduction_to_CSS/Selectors))
* `d3.select(selector).text()` _retrieves_ the text of an element.
* `d3.select(selector).text("New text here")` _changes_ the text of an element to "New text here".
* `d3.select(selector).html()` retrieves the inner HTML of an element.
* `d3.select(".mylink>a")` selects the first anchor tag within an element with the class name `.mylink`.
* Elements selected using D3 have attributes and methods.
* `element.attr("href")` allows you to retrieve the "href" attribute of an element, if present.
* `d3.selectAll(selector)` selects all elements that match the given selector.
* `d3.select("ul").append("li")` appends an `li` element to the first `ul` element we find.
* `d3.select("ul").append("li").text("This is a new list item")` "chains" methods to 1.) append our `li` element to the `ul` tag and 2.) adds text to the `li` tag.
* Chaining methods onto one another like this help us write less code when we have multiple operations on the same element(s)

#### 3 - API requests with `d3.json()`

* `d3.json()` allows you to make API requests to a given URL, handling the API response with a callback function.
* `d3.json()` expects a JSON response (it parses the response as JSON).
* `d3.json()` takes two arguments: 1.) the URL you want to request and 2.) a callback function that processes the response
* The callback function should accept two arguments: any error that results from the 
* *`d3.json() will raise any errors and process the response behind the scenes. It then passes any error and the response to the callback function you pass, as the first and second argument, respectively.*
* If no error is raised, the error will be `null`.
* `JSON.stringify(var)` converts the JavaScript variable `var` into a JSON string. Here, we need to convert our object to a string before writing the string to the DOM.
* `document.write(data)` writes `data` to the DOM. This _overwrites_ any existing data in the document. This is mostly used for testing (here, we're just printing the contents of our API response to the screen).

#### 5 - Events with D3

* We can use D3 to add event listeners to elements, just like with `addEventListener` before.
* Like in exercise 1, we're using `d3.select(selector)` to select an element with a given CSS `selector`.
* Given an element, we run the `on` method on that element to add an event listener.
* The syntax for using the `on` method: `$el.on("click", callback)`. `on` takes the exact same arguments as `addEventListener`.
* The `append` method on an element works like the `appendChild` method we saw last class: it appends an element of a given type to the element on which we run the method.
* Again we see how method "chaining" can reduce the code we have to write for operations that happen on the selected element(s).

#### 7 - Forms

* We often want to collect user data and react accordingly. Forms can help.
* `d3.event.preventDefault()` prevents the page from reloading (the default if we have a form without a URL to POST data to).
* `d3.select(inputSelector).node().value` retrieves an input field (replace `inputSelector` with the selector for the `input` field), retrieves the actual node from the selection, and the value from that.

#### 9 - `this`

* `this` is a special variable that holds information about the current environment. The value of `this` will be different depending on where it is referenced. Let's review a few examples...
* [Reference on `this`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/this)

#### 10 - The data attribute

* Sometimes we want to associate data with elements. These data may be helpful to associate with our elements, just like an `alt` attribute in an `img`.
* [Why are these helpful?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Howto/Use_data_attributes)
